velox/docs/functions/comparison.rst, before:

=====================================
Comparison Functions
=====================================

.. function:: between(x, min, max) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is within the specified [min, max] range
    inclusive. Supports TINYINT, SMALLINT, INTEGER, BIGINT, DOUBLE,
    REAL, VARCHAR, DATE types. The types of all arguments must be
    the same.

.. function:: eq(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is equal to y. Supports all scalar types. The
    types of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: greatest(value1, value2, ..., valueN) -> [same as input]

    Returns the largest of the provided values. Supports DOUBLE, BIGINT,
    VARCHAR, TIMESTAMP, DATE input types. The types of all arguments must
    be the same.

.. function:: gt(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is greater than y. Supports all scalar types. The
    types of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: gte(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is greater than or equal to y. Supports all scalar
    types. The types of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: is_null(x) -> boolean

    Returns true is x is a null. Supports all types.

.. function:: least(value1, value2, ..., valueN) -> [same as input]

    Returns the smallest of the provided values. Supports DOUBLE, BIGINT,
    VARCHAR, TIMESTAMP, DATE input types. The types of all arguments must
    be the same.

.. function:: lt(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is less than y. Supports all scalar types. The types
    of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: lte(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is less than or equal to y. Supports all scalar types.
    The types of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: neq(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is not equal to y. Supports all scalar types. The types
    of x and y must be the same.

Commit message:

Implement Presto's DISTINCT FROM. (#1611)
Summary:
Pull Request resolved: https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox/pull/1611

X-link: https://github.com/facebookexternal/presto_cpp/pull/744

Implement Presto's DISTINCT FROM
See https://prestodb.io/docs/current/functions/comparison.html#is-distinct-from-and-is-not-distinct-from

Reviewed By: mbasmanova

Differential Revision: D36372701

fbshipit-source-id: 8e63d6d117d114f5c918780d29fceb6a27bfb8ab

velox/docs/functions/comparison.rst, after:

=====================================
Comparison Functions
=====================================

.. function:: between(x, min, max) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is within the specified [min, max] range
    inclusive. Supports TINYINT, SMALLINT, INTEGER, BIGINT, DOUBLE,
    REAL, VARCHAR, DATE types. The types of all arguments must be
    the same.

.. function:: distinct_from(x, y) -> boolean

    In SQL a ``NULL`` value signifies an unknown value, so any comparison
    involving a ``NULL`` will produce NULL. The ``distinct_from`` treats
    NULL as a known value and guarantees either a ``true`` or ``false``
    outcome even in the presence of ``NULL`` input.
    So ``distinct_from(NULL, NULL)`` returns ``false``, since a ``NULL``
    value is not considered distinct from ``NULL``.

.. function:: eq(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is equal to y. Supports all scalar types. The
    types of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: greatest(value1, value2, ..., valueN) -> [same as input]

    Returns the largest of the provided values. Supports DOUBLE, BIGINT,
    VARCHAR, TIMESTAMP, DATE input types. The types of all arguments must
    be the same.

.. function:: gt(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is greater than y. Supports all scalar types. The
    types of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: gte(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is greater than or equal to y. Supports all scalar
    types. The types of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: is_null(x) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is a null. Supports all types.

.. function:: least(value1, value2, ..., valueN) -> [same as input]

    Returns the smallest of the provided values. Supports DOUBLE, BIGINT,
    VARCHAR, TIMESTAMP, DATE input types. The types of all arguments must
    be the same.

.. function:: lt(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is less than y. Supports all scalar types. The types
    of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: lte(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is less than or equal to y. Supports all scalar types.
    The types of x and y must be the same.

.. function:: neq(x, y) -> boolean

    Returns true if x is not equal to y. Supports all scalar types. The types
    of x and y must be the same.
