****************
July 2025 Update
****************

This update was generated with the assistance of AI. While we strive for accuracy, please note
that AI-generated content may not always be error-free. We encourage you to verify any information
that you deem important.

Core Library
============

* Switch to C++20 standard. :pr:`10866`
* Add ParallelProject node and operator from Verax. :pr:`14220`
* Add barriered execution support to AssignUniqueId. :pr:`14224`
* Add support for left join semantics to Unnest. :pr:`14095`
* Add support for converting OPAQUE vectors to variant. :pr:`14235`
* Add basic support for coercions to help with function type resolution. :pr:`14113`
* Optimize streaming aggregation by removing max output batch size limit, reducing peak memory 4x. :pr:`14238`
* Fix deadlock when dropping non-existent child memory pools. :pr:`14202`
* Fix Variant::hash and BaseVector::hashValueAt for arrays and maps. :pr:`14019`
* Fix ConstantTypedExpr equals/hash/toString methods for various data types. :pr:`14055`
* Fix AssignUniqueId needsInput logic. :pr:`14127`

Presto Functions
================

* Add :func:`dot_product` function for embedding similarity calculations.
* Add seeded version of :func:`xxhash64` function.
* Add SFM sketch functions: :func:`merge`, :func:`noisy_approx_set_sfm_from_index_and_zeros`, :func:`noisy_approx_distinct_sfm` and :func:`noisy_approx_set_sfm` aggregate functions.
* Add :func:`quantile_at_value` and :func:`scale_qdigest` functions.
* Add :func:`geometry_nearest_points`, :func:`ST_NumPoints`, :func:`ST_EnvelopeAsPts`, :func:`ST_Points` functions.
* Add :func:`ST_Buffer`, :func:`ST_CoordDim`, :func:`ST_Envelope`, :func:`ST_ExteriorRing` functions.
* Add :func:`ST_ConvexHull`, :func:`ST_Dimension`, :func:`ST_NumInteriorRing`, :func:`ST_NumGeometries` functions.
* Add :func:`ST_GeometryN`, :func:`ST_InteriorRingN`, :func:`ST_StartPoint`, :func:`ST_EndPoint` functions.
* Add :func:`ST_PointN`, :func:`ST_Length`, :func:`ST_IsClosed`, :func:`ST_Empty`, :func:`ST_IsRing` functions.
* Add :func:`ST_Polygon` function.
* Fix Geometry serialization/deserialization errors for GeometryCollections with empty geometries. :pr:`14243`
* Optimize :func:`flatten` as a VectorFunction to enable zero copy. :pr:`14215`

Spark Functions
===============

* Add :spark:func:`base64` and :spark:func:`initcap` functions.
* Add support for decimal type in :spark:func:`from_json` function.
* Add :spark:func:`abs` function to handle ANSI mode differences from Presto.
* Fix :spark:func:`corr` aggregate function to return NaN instead of NULL when variance is zero. :pr:`13956`
* Fix :spark:func:`covar_samp` aggregate function to return NaN instead of Inf when c2 is infinite. :pr:`13990`
* Fix :spark:func:`get_json_object` function to normalize JSON paths properly. :pr:`13854`

Connectors
==========

* Add metadata support and filter pushdown to TpchConnector. :pr:`14099`
* Add HDFS filesystem operations: remove, rmdir, rename, mkdir. :pr:`13948`
* Add S3 filesystem operations: exists and list. :pr:`13893`
* Add TokenProvider support to ConnectorQueryCtx for authentication. :pr:`13919`
* Add support for timestamp as Hive partition ID. :pr:`13494`
* Add text format write support for complex types: ROW, MAP, and ARRAY. :pr:`14064`
* Add escape character support for text parsing. :pr:`14130`
* Add backward compatibility support for TIMESTAMP in TextReader. :pr:`14063`
* Fix HiveDataSink to materialize input before writes to prevent lazy vector errors. :pr:`14085`

Performance and Correctness
===========================

* Make BingTile and other custom types non-orderable to match Presto behavior. :pr:`14100`
* Fix Cast to JSON output size estimation for invalid Unicode input. :pr:`14062`
* Fix constant input size validation in streaming aggregation. :pr:`13933`
* Fix hash aggregation row container cleanup crash on abort. :pr:`13979`

Credits
=======

Amit Dutta, Bikramjeet Vig, Bowen Wu, Chengcheng Jin, Christian Zentgraf,
Elodie Li, Eric Jia, Heidi Han, Henry Edwin Dikeman, Hongze Zhang, Jacob
Khaliqi, Jacob Wujciak-Jens, James Gill, Jialiang Tan, Jimmy Lu, Joe Abraham,
Ke Jia, Ke Wang, Kevin Wilfong, Konstantinos Karatsenidis, Krishna Pai, Libin
Bai, Manikanta Loya, Masha Basmanova, Natasha Sehgal, Oliver Xu, Orri Erling,
Patrick Sullivan, Pedro Eugenio Rocha Pedreira, Peter Enescu, Pramod Satya,
Raaghav Ravishankar, Rajeev Dharmendra Singh, Rui Mo, Sutou Kouhei, Tony Liu,
Vincent Crabtree, Xiao Du, Xiaoxuan Meng, Yi Cheng Lee, Yuxuan Chen, Zhen Li,
Zhiying Liang, aditi-pandit, lingbin, nimesh.k, wecharyu, wraymo, zhli1142015,
zml1206
