****************
July 2022 Update
****************

Documentation
=============

* Add documentation for Presto related :doc:`/functions/json`.

Core Library
============

* Add WindowNode to describe window functions computations. Window operator implementation is still in development.
* Add support for DECIMAL type Variant values.

Presto Functions
================

* Add :func:`array_sort`, :func:`combinations` functions.
* Add :func:`approx_most_frequent` aggregate function.
* Extend aggregate functions :func:`min_by`, :func:`max_by` to support VARCHAR inputs.
* Add support for cast from a JSON type value to ARRAYS or MAPS of JSON type values.

Hive Connector
==============

* Add NegatedBytesRange filter to optimize `NOT IN` filters on string columns pushed down into DWRF reader.
* Add Parquet writer implemented over Apache Arrow Parquet writer.

Performance and Correctness
===========================

* Add q5, q10, q12, q14, q19, q22 to TPC-H benchmark.
* Optimize KLL sketch memory usage by allocating memory based on the number of elements retained.
* Optimize arithmetic operations that check for overflow by enabling a fast execution path.
* Optimize :func:`row_constructor` Presto function by removing redundant copy.
* Add benchmarks for NegatedBigintRange, NegatedBytesRange filters.
* Improve test coverage for various aggregate functions.
* Improve performance of MmapAllocator::allocate.
* Create nightly fuzzer `CI run`_.

.. _CI run: https://app.circleci.com/insights/github/facebookincubator/velox/workflows/nightly/jobs?branch=main

Debugging Experience
====================

* Add WindowNode::addDetails implementation.

Credits
=======

Aditi Pandit, Amit Dutta, Andrew Gallagher, Bikramjeet Vig, Chad Austin, Connor Devlin,
Daniel Ng, David Greenberg, Deepak Majeti, Ge Gao, Huameng Jiang, Ivan Morett,
Jialiang Tan, Jie1 Zhang, Jimmy Lu, Jonathan Mendoza, Karteek Murthy, Kevin Wilfong,
Kimberly Yang, Krishna Pai, Laith Sakka, Masha Basmanova, Michael Shang, Naresh Kumar,
Orri Erling, Orvid King, Pedro Eugenio Rocha Pedreira, PenghuiJiao, Pramod, Prasoon Telang,
Scott Wolchok, Victor Zverovich, Wei He, Xavier Deguillard, Xiaoxuan Meng, Yoav Helfman,
Zeyi (Rice) Fan, Zhenyuan Zhao, usurai, yingsu00