****************
July 2024 Update
****************

This month has **170** commits from **47** authors. Below are some of the highlights.

Documentation
=============

* Document :doc:`Spark Types </develop/types>`.
* Document :doc:`Empty Window Frames </develop/window>`.

Core Library
============

* Add support for Wave Driver and Aggregate operator on Nvidia GPUs.
* Add support for multiple dynamic filters pushed to the same column by merging them.
* Add support for polymorphic `dwio::common::WriterOptions`.
* Add checkpoint support for SSD cache writes.
* Add normalization rules for timezone offsets :pr:`10611`
* Add support for TPC-H Query 4 in TPCHQueryBuilder.
* Fix SSD cache delta stats reported. :pr:`10408`
* Fix SSD cache recovery by preserving file id map.
* Fix incorrect result of approx_percentile in window operations. :pr:`10368`
* Fix deadlock in MemoryPool when `toString`` is invoked. :pr:`10400`
* Fix `try_cast` to not suppress `VeloxRuntimeErrors`.
* Fix `AssignUniqueId`` to avoid generating duplicate IDs. :pr:`10492`
* Fix range and multi-range filters to handle NaNs correctly. :pr:`10533`
* Fix memory leak in HashBuild operator.
* Fix HashBuild memory over-use. :pr:`10534`
* Fix deadlock in join when arbitration is triggered.
* Fix timezone conversions to use seconds instead of time point to reduce overflows.
* Fix spilling of grouping set. :pr:`10548`

Presto Functions
================

* Add :func:`secure_random`, :func:`inverse_weibull_cdf`, :func:`inverse_cauchy_cdf`
  :func:`inverse_laplace_cdf` functions.
* Fix NaN handling in comparison functions. :pr:`10165`
* Fix Nan handling in  :func:`min`, :func:`max`, :func:`min_by`, :func:`max_by` aggregate functions. :pr:`10583`, :pr:`10586`
* Fix :func:`is_finite` for NaN input. :pr:`10599`
* Fix timezone handling in :func:`to_iso8601` for TIMESTAMP input. :pr:`10576`


Spark Functions
===============

* Add :spark:func:`raise_error`, :spark:func:`levenshtein`, :spark:func:`repeat`,
  :spark:func:`json_object_keys`, :spark:func:`mask` scalar functions.
* Add :spark:func:`min`, :spark:func:`max`, :spark:func:`collect_set` aggregate functions.
* Add SIMD support for hash and comparison functions. :pr:`10301`, :pr:`10273`
* Add support for fast path comparison function in join filter.
* Fix CAST(STRING AS BOOLEAN) to only allow inputs supported by Spark.

Hive Connector
==============

* Add support for reading dictionary encoded INT96 TIMESTAMP types in Parquet.
* Add support for reading BINARY as STRING in parquet.
* Fix selective MAP and ARRAY column readers by passing requested type instead of file type.
* Fix DELTA_BINARY_PACKED Parquet decoder. :pr:`10485`
* Fix Iceberg read with positional delete files. :pr:`10505`


Performance and Correctness
===========================

* Add PrefixSort in OrderBy and TableWrite.
* Optimize `cast(UUID AS VARCHAR)` by using a custom implementation. :pr:`10361`
* Optimize execution by reducing peeled vectors size. :pr:`10521`

Build System
============

* Add support for monolithic build.
* Add support for ARM64 CPU Neoverse N1/N2/V1 architectures.


Credits
=======
::

     5	Amit Dutta - Meta
     6	Bikramjeet Vig - Meta
     2	Bradley Dice - Nvidia
     4	Christian Zentgraf - IBM
     3	Daniel Hunte - Meta
     9	Deepak Majeti - IBM
     1	Guilherme Kunigami - Meta
     1	Huameng (Michael) Jiang - Meta
     1	Jacob Khaliqi - IBM
     2	Jacob Wujciak-Jens - Voltron Data
     1	Jia Ke - Intel
    11	Jialiang Tan - Meta
     8	Jimmy Lu - Meta
     1	JineHelin404
     4	Ke
     1	Kevin Pis
     7	Kevin Wilfong - Meta
     6	Krishna Pai - Meta
     2	Masha Basmanova - Meta
     2	Orri Erling - Meta
     1	PHILO-HE - Intel
    15	Pedro Eugenio Rocha Pedreira - Meta
     1	Reetika Agrawal - IBM
     2	Richard Barnes - Meta
     1	Shengxuan Liu - ByteDance
     7	Wei He - Meta
     4	Wills Feng - IBM
     1	Xuedong Luan
     1	YIMINGXU
     1	Yuqi Gu
     3	Zac Wen - Meta
     1	Zuyu ZHANG
     4	Aditi Pandit - IBM
     1	Duanmeng - Tencent
     2	gaoyangxiaozhu
     3	hengjiang.ly - Alibaba Inc
     2	joey.ljy - Alibaba Inc
     1	kevincmchen
     7	lingbin - Alibaba Inc
     1	mwish
    13	Rui Mo - Intel
     5	xiaoxmeng - Meta
     2	Ying Su - IBM
     2	youxiduo
    12	Zhen Li - Microsoft
