README.md, before:

<img src="static/logo.svg" alt="Velox logo" width="50%" align="center" />

Velox is a C++ database acceleration library which provides reusable,
extensible, and high-performance data processing components. These components
can be reused to build compute engines focused on different analytical
workloads, including batch, interactive, stream processing, and AI/ML.
Velox was created by Facebook and it is currently developed in partnership with
Intel, ByteDance, and Ahana.

In common usage scenarios, Velox takes a fully optimized query plan as input
and performs the described computation. Considering Velox does not provide a
SQL parser, a dataframe layer, or a query optimizer, it is usually not meant
to be used directly by end-users; rather, it is mostly used by developers
integrating and optimizing their compute engines.

Velox provides the following high-level components:

* **Type**: a generic typing system that supports scalar, complex, and nested
  types, such as structs, maps, arrays, tensors, etc.
* **Vector**: an [Arrow-compatible columnar memory layout
  module](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/vectors.html),
  which provides multiple encodings, such as Flat, Dictionary, Constant,
  Sequence/RLE, and Bias, in addition to a lazy materialization pattern and
  support for out-of-order writes.
* **Expression Eval**: a [fully vectorized expression evaluation
  engine](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/expression-evaluation.html)
  that allows expressions to be efficiently executed on top of Vector/Arrow
  encoded data.
* **Function Packages**: sets of vectorized function implementations following
  the Presto and Spark semantic.
* **Operators**: implementation of common data processing operators such as
  scans, projection, filtering, groupBy, orderBy, shuffle, [hash
  join](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/joins.html), unnest,
  and more.
* **I/O**: a generic connector interface that allows different file formats
  (ORC/DWRF and Parquet) and storage adapters (S3, HDFS, local files) to be
  used.
* **Network Serializers**: an interface where different wire protocols can be
  implemented, used for network communication, supporting
  [PrestoPage](https://prestodb.io/docs/current/develop/serialized-page.html)
  and Spark's UnsafeRow.
* **Resource Management**: a collection of primitives for handling
  computational resources, such as [memory
  arenas](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/arena.html) and
  buffer management, tasks, drivers, and thread pools for CPU and thread
  execution, spilling, and caching.

Velox is extensible and allows developers to define their own engine-specific
specializations, including:

1. Custom types
2. [Simple and vectorized functions](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/scalar-functions.html)
3. [Aggregate functions](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/aggregate-functions.html)
4. Operators
5. File formats
6. Storage adapters
7. Network serializers

## Examples

Examples of extensibility and integration with different component APIs [can be
found here](velox/examples)

## Documentation

Developer guides detailing many aspects of the library, in addition to the list
of available functions [can be found here.](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox)

## Getting Started

We provide scripts to help developers setup and install Velox dependencies.

### Get the Velox Source
```
git clone --recursive https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox.git
cd velox
# if you are updating an existing checkout
git submodule sync --recursive
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### Setting up on macOS

See [scripts/setup-macos.sh](scripts/setup-macos.sh)

### Setting up on Linux (Ubuntu 20.04 or later)

See [scripts/setup-ubuntu.sh](scripts/setup-ubuntu.sh)

### Building Velox

Run `make` in the root directory to compile the sources. For development, use
`make debug` to build a non-optimized debug version, or `make release` to build
an optimized version.  Use `make unittest` to build and run tests.

Note that,
* Velox requires C++17 , thus minimum supported compiler is GCC 5.0 and Clang 5.0.
* Velox requires the CPU to support instruction sets:
  * bmi
  * bmi2
  * f16c
* Velox tries to use the following (or equivalent) instruction sets where available:
  * On Intel CPUs
    * avx  
    * avx2
    * sse
  * On ARM
    * Neon

## Contributing

Check our [contributing guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) to learn about how to
contribute to the project.

## Community

The main communication channel with the Velox OSS community is through the
[the Velox-OSS Slack workspace](http://velox-oss.slack.com). 
Please reach out to **velox@fb.com** to get access to Velox Slack Channel.


## License

Velox is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. A copy of the license
[can be found here.](LICENSE)

Commit message:

Add more details in readme for macos builds. (#1828)
Summary: Pull Request resolved: https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox/pull/1828

Reviewed By: bikramSingh91

Differential Revision: D37217124

Pulled By: kgpai

fbshipit-source-id: f4b489eef1791fd573aab1cb3a76eaa0384a7613

README.md, after:

<img src="static/logo.svg" alt="Velox logo" width="50%" align="center" />

Velox is a C++ database acceleration library which provides reusable,
extensible, and high-performance data processing components. These components
can be reused to build compute engines focused on different analytical
workloads, including batch, interactive, stream processing, and AI/ML.
Velox was created by Facebook and it is currently developed in partnership with
Intel, ByteDance, and Ahana.

In common usage scenarios, Velox takes a fully optimized query plan as input
and performs the described computation. Considering Velox does not provide a
SQL parser, a dataframe layer, or a query optimizer, it is usually not meant
to be used directly by end-users; rather, it is mostly used by developers
integrating and optimizing their compute engines.

Velox provides the following high-level components:

* **Type**: a generic typing system that supports scalar, complex, and nested
  types, such as structs, maps, arrays, tensors, etc.
* **Vector**: an [Arrow-compatible columnar memory layout
  module](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/vectors.html),
  which provides multiple encodings, such as Flat, Dictionary, Constant,
  Sequence/RLE, and Bias, in addition to a lazy materialization pattern and
  support for out-of-order writes.
* **Expression Eval**: a [fully vectorized expression evaluation
  engine](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/expression-evaluation.html)
  that allows expressions to be efficiently executed on top of Vector/Arrow
  encoded data.
* **Function Packages**: sets of vectorized function implementations following
  the Presto and Spark semantic.
* **Operators**: implementation of common data processing operators such as
  scans, projection, filtering, groupBy, orderBy, shuffle, [hash
  join](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/joins.html), unnest,
  and more.
* **I/O**: a generic connector interface that allows different file formats
  (ORC/DWRF and Parquet) and storage adapters (S3, HDFS, local files) to be
  used.
* **Network Serializers**: an interface where different wire protocols can be
  implemented, used for network communication, supporting
  [PrestoPage](https://prestodb.io/docs/current/develop/serialized-page.html)
  and Spark's UnsafeRow.
* **Resource Management**: a collection of primitives for handling
  computational resources, such as [memory
  arenas](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/arena.html) and
  buffer management, tasks, drivers, and thread pools for CPU and thread
  execution, spilling, and caching.

Velox is extensible and allows developers to define their own engine-specific
specializations, including:

1. Custom types
2. [Simple and vectorized functions](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/scalar-functions.html)
3. [Aggregate functions](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox/develop/aggregate-functions.html)
4. Operators
5. File formats
6. Storage adapters
7. Network serializers

## Examples

Examples of extensibility and integration with different component APIs [can be
found here](velox/examples)

## Documentation

Developer guides detailing many aspects of the library, in addition to the list
of available functions [can be found here.](https://facebookincubator.github.io/velox)

## Getting Started

We provide scripts to help developers setup and install Velox dependencies.

### Get the Velox Source
```
git clone --recursive https://github.com/facebookincubator/velox.git
cd velox
# if you are updating an existing checkout
git submodule sync --recursive
git submodule update --init --recursive
```

### Setting up on macOS

Once you have checked out Velox, On an Intel MacOS machine you can setup and then build like so :

```shell
$ ./scripts/setup-macos.sh 
$ make
```

On an M1 MacOS machine you can build like so:

```shell
$ CPU_TARGET="arm64" ./scripts/setup-macos.sh
$ CPU_TARGET="arm64" make
```

You can also produce intel binaries on an M1, just `CPU_TARGET="sse"` for the above.

### Setting up on Linux (Ubuntu 20.04 or later)

Once you have checked out Velox, you can setup and build like so:

```shell
$ ./scripts/setup-ubuntu.sh 
$ make
```

### Building Velox

Run `make` in the root directory to compile the sources. For development, use
`make debug` to build a non-optimized debug version, or `make release` to build
an optimized version.  Use `make unittest` to build and run tests.

Note that,
* Velox requires C++17 , thus minimum supported compiler is GCC 5.0 and Clang 5.0.
* Velox requires the CPU to support instruction sets:
  * bmi
  * bmi2
  * f16c
* Velox tries to use the following (or equivalent) instruction sets where available:
  * On Intel CPUs
    * avx  
    * avx2
    * sse
  * On ARM
    * Neon

## Contributing

Check our [contributing guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) to learn about how to
contribute to the project.

## Community

The main communication channel with the Velox OSS community is through the
[the Velox-OSS Slack workspace](http://velox-oss.slack.com). 
Please reach out to **velox@fb.com** to get access to Velox Slack Channel.


## License

Velox is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License. A copy of the license
[can be found here.](LICENSE)
