****************
June 2024 Update
****************

This month has **261** commits from **58** authors. Below are some of the highlights.

Documentation
=============

* Document :doc:`Timestamp and Timezone Management </develop/timestamp>`.

Core Library
============

* Add UUID Presto type.
* Add options to configure saving data to SSD cache. :pr:`10056`
* Add support for spill read ahead. :pr:`10008`
* Fix Joins with filters on LazyVectors. :pr:`10045`
* Fix incorrect results due to lazy evaluation of remaining filter. :pr:`10072`

Presto Functions
================

* Add :func:`regexp_split`, :func:`regexp_replace`, :func:`to_milliseconds`,
  :func:`from_iso8601_timestamp`, :func:`json_array_get`,
  :func:`map_remove_null_values`, :func:`array_cum_sum`, :func:`normalize`,
  :func:`inverse_normal_cdf`, :func:`lpad`, :func:`rpad`, :func:`fail`,
  :func:`map_top_n_keys` functions.
* Add support for TS_WITH_TZ +/- INTERVAL function.
* Add support for INTERVAL input to :func:`year`, :func:`month`, :func:`hour`,
  :func:`minute`, :func:`second`, :func:`millisecond`, comparison functions.
* Add support for CAST(TIMESTAMP WITH TIMEZONE AS VARCHAR).
* Add support for CAST(DATE AS TIMESTAMP WITH TIMEZONE).
* Add support for CAST(TIMESTAMP WITH TIMEZONE AS DATE).
* Add support for trailing spaces in CAST(VARCHAR as DATE).
* Add support for negative array index, single-quoted keys, paths without leading "$"
  JsonPath argument in JSON functions such as :func:`json_extract`.
* Add support for DECIMAL in :func:`modulus` function.
* Add support for DATETIME unit 'week' in :func:`date_add` and :func:`date_diff` functions.
* Add support for TIMESTAMP input in :func:`to_iso8601` function.
* Add support for variable pattern and replacement in :func:`regexp_replace` function.
* Add support for INTERVAL and TIMESTAMP WITH TIMEZONE to between function.
* Fix parsing of 'March' and 'MARCH' input in :func:`date_parse` function.
* Add support for complex types to :func:`distinct_from`, :func:`array_distinct`,
  :func:`histogram` functions.
* Add support for VARBINARY to :func:`concat`, :func:`from_base64`, :func:`substr` functions.
* Add support for REAL, DECIMAL to :func:`truncate` function.
* Add support for :func:`from_unixtime(unixtime, hours, minutes)` function.
* Add support for TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE input to :func:`least`, :func:`greatest`, :func:`minus` functions.
* Add support for BOOLEAN input to :func:`approx_most_frequent` function.
* Fix :func:`json_array_contains` for NaN, Infinity, -Infinity arguments. :pr:`10023`
* Fix :func:`min`, :func:`max` handling for NaN, Infinity, -Infinity arguments. :pr:`9931`

Spark Functions
===============

* Add :spark:func:`log` function.
* Add support for DECIMAL input to :spark:func:`greatest` and :spark:func:`least` functions.
* Add support for complex types to :spark:func:`equalto` and :spark:func:`equalnullsafe` functions.
* Add support for FLOAT and DOUBLE types to :spark:func:`mod` function.
* Fix :spark:func:`in` for NaN inputs.

Hive Connector
==============

* Add "cache.no_retention" session config to allow a query not retain data in the AsyncDataCache
  and skip SSD Cache.
* Add retry for S3 filesystem.
* Add support for ORC file-format Reader.

Performance and Correctness
===========================

* Add benchmark of casting string to double.
* Add benchmark for Iceberg SplitReader.
* Parallelize spilling by partitioning. :pr:`9938`
* Optimize merge-join by using vectorization and conditional use of dictionary encoding. :pr:`9763`
* SIMD-ize comparisons for DATE type.

Build System
============

* Add support for Centos9 Stream + GCC12.
* Update fbos deps to v2024.05.20.00.

Credits
=======
::

     1	Amit Dutta - Meta
     3	Andrii Rosa - Meta
     1	Ankita Victor - Microsoft
     1	Athmaja N - IBM
     8	Bikramjeet Vig - Meta
     2	Christian Zentgraf - IBM
     1	Daniel Hunte - Meta
     1	Daniel Jonathan Hunte - Meta
    13	Deepak Majeti - IBM
     1	Deepashree Gandhi - IBM
     1	Huameng (Michael) Jiang - Meta
     1	Jacob Khaliqi
     5	Jacob Wujciak-Jens - Voltron Data
     3	Jia Ke - Intel
     7	Jialiang Tan
    17	Jimmy Lu - Meta
     7	Ke
    24	Kevin Wilfong - Meta
     3	Krishna Pai - Meta
     1	Kunal Kataria - Meta
    56	Masha Basmanova - Meta
     1	NEUpanning
     4	Orri Erling - Meta
     5	PHILO-HE - Intel
     9	Pedro Eugenio Rocha Pedreira - Meta
     3	Pramod Satya - IBM
     1	Pranjal Shankhdhar - Meta
     1	Pratik Joseph Dabre
     1	Reetika Agrawal - IBM
     3	Sandino Flores - Intel
     7	Wei He - Meta
     1	Yoav Helfman - Meta
    11	Zac Wen - Meta
     1	Zhenyuan Zhao - Meta
     1	aditi-pandit - IBM
     1	chenweiguo.vc - ByteDance
     1	deepthydavis - IBM
     4	duanmeng - Tencent
     1	gaoyangxiaozhu
     1	joey.ljy - Alibaba Inc
     1	liangyongyuan - Xiaomi
     4	lingbin - Alibaba Inc
     3	mwish
     1	rexan
     2	rui-mo - Intel
     1	soumyaduriseti - IBM
     1	wjameswu - Tencent
     8	wypb - Tencent
    16	xiaoxmeng - Meta
     1	yan ma - Intel
     1	yangshijie.2024 - ByteDance
     4	yanngyoung - Tencent
     5	zhli1142015 - Microsoft
