****************
June 2023 Update
****************

Core Library
============

* Add MarkDistinct operator.
* Add TopNRowNumber operator.
* Add support for aggregations over sorted inputs: `SELECT agg(x, ORDER BY y) FROM t`.
* Add join expression support to Nested Loop join.
* Add serialization support for TableScanNode and TableWriteNode.
* Add INTERVAL YEAR TO MONTH type.
* Add basic support for writing bucketed tables.
* Add support for UNKNOWN type to UnsafeRow serializer.

Presto Functions
================

* Add :func:`lead` and :func:`lag` window functions.
* Add :func:`set_agg` and :func:`set_union` aggregate functions.
* Add :func:`rand` alias for :func:`random` function.
* Add :func:`array_trim` function.
* Add :func:`flatten` function.
* Add :func:`kurtosis` and :func:`skewness` functions.
* Add :func:`map_from_entries` function.
* Add :func:`json_extract` function.
* Add :func:`sum_data_size_for_stats aggregation` function.
* Add 3-argument version of :func:`min_by` and :func:`max_by` aggregate functions.
* Add :func:`concat`(array(E), E) function.
* Add support for inputs of type DECIMAL to :func:`round` function.
* Add support for inputs of type REAL in :func:`least` and :func:`greatest` functions.
* Add support for inputs of type TIMESTAMP in :func:`min_by` and :func:`max_by` aggregate functions.
* Add support for inputs of type VARCHAR in :func:`histogram` aggregate function.
* Add support for input maps with VARCHAR keys in :func:`map_union_sum` aggregate function.
* Add support for inputs of type UNKNOWN to :func:`map_union` aggregate function.
* Fix :func:`date_diff` function to allow case insensitive units.
* Optimize :func:`json_array_length` and :func:`json_array_contains` functions using SIMD.

Spark Functions
===============

* Add :spark:func:`bin` function.
* Add :spark:func:`last_day` function.
* Add :spark:func:`overlay` function.
* Add :spark:func:`bit_count` and :spark:func:`bit_get` functions.
* Add :spark:func:`bloom_filter_agg` aggregate function.

Performance and Correctness
===========================

* Enable switch and dereference expressions in Fuzzer.

Credits
=======

Aditi Pandit, Amit Dutta, Ariel Ji, Arpit Porwal, Austin Dickey, Bikramjeet Vig,
Chengcheng Jin, Daniel Munoz, Darren Fu, David Vu, Deepak Majeti, Ge Gao,
Genevieve (Genna) Helsel, Huameng Jiang, Ivan Sadikov, Jalpreet Singh Nanda
(:imjalpreet), Jia Ke, Jialiang Tan, Jiayan Wei, Jimmy Lu, Karteek Murthy Samba
Murthy, Karteekmurthys, Ke, Kevin Wilfong, Krishna Pai, Laith Sakka, Lingfeng
Zhang, Masha Basmanova, Nick Terrell, Open Source Bot, Orri Erling, Patrick
Sullivan, Paul Amonson, Pedro Eugenio Rocha Pedreira, Pramod, Richard Barnes,
Sanjiban Sengupta, Serge Druzkin, Sergey Pershin, Shiyu Gan, Wei He, Yang
Zhang, Zac, duanmeng, joey.ljy, rui-mo, usurai, wanweiqiangintel, xiaoxmeng,
xiyu.zk, yangchuan, yingsu00, zhli1142015
